content/blog/workflow-for-partial-git-commits.md, before:

---
title: Workflow for partial Git commits
modified: 1449528542165
---

Here's the scenario: You've coded for a whole day and not done a single `git
commit` yet. How do you avoid 500+ line commits and break up your work to
logical commits?

# Copy your workflow from XCode

If you've ever done a commit with XCode, you know that one thing the Apple's
developers got right: The Version Editor.

<picture>
<source srcset="/images/xcode-version-editor-x2.png" media="(-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 2) and (min-width: 702px)">
<img alt="Xcode version editor" src="/images/xcode-version-editor.png">
</picture>

Version Editor lets you go through your changes you've done after your latest
commit. Before you write your commit message, you can briefly go through every
file and *choose* whether to include that specific change or not.

# How to apply Apple's workflow to command line?

Your regular "time to do a commit" workflow probably looks something like this:

```bash
git add .
git commit
```

The bad news is, that you automatically commit everything that you've touched
since the last commit. So how could we change this workflow to have the same
effect as with the XCode's version editor?

## Introducing stash diff

The good news is, that you can do a trick with the `git stash` that pretty much
mimics the workflow from XCode. This trick being, that you can do a `git diff`
also to the most recent `stash`:

```bash
git diff stash
```

Which shows the diff to the current stash. We can take it a step further and
launch the interactive `difftool` (I'm using OpenDiff) to go through the diffs,
adding the changes back to stage one by one.

# Taking it all together

So let's go through the whole workflow one by one.

## 1. Add everything to git

You should start up with your regular flow to make sure all changes are added to
your git.

```bash
git add -A
```

The `-A` flag adds every file to be committed, regardless of which directory
you're currently in.

## 2. Push the changes to stash

```bash
git stash
```

It doesn't matter if you already have something in your stash, since this
command always adds a new stash to the stack.

## 3. Pick which changes to commit

The following command opens up your difftool, which lets you pick the changes
you've made one by one back to stage:

```bash
git difftool -y stash
```

Note that you actually have to select all the changes you want to commit *back*
to your stage. If you're using OpenDiff, it means the arrow should point left to
add that change to your commit.

<picture>
<source srcset="/images/opendiff-x2.png" media="(-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 2) and (min-width: 702px)">
<img alt="OpenDiff arrow should point left to include it in the commit" src="/images/opendiff.png" width="645">
</picture>

When you're done with the file, hit `cmd` + `Q` to exit OpenDiff. When the
program prompts you whether to save the file, make sure to overwrite the current
file.


<img alt="Say yes to OpenDiff" src="/images/opendiff-confirm.png" width="451">

## 4. Perform the commit

Up next is your common routine: committing.

```bash
git commit -a
```

This creates a commit from the changes you just selected from the diff.

## 5. Pull back rest of the changes

Now we should head back to where we started. We can do this by popping the most
recently pushed stash:

```bash
git stash pop
```

Note that the stash we pop **does include the changes we already committed**,
but git just knows that it should discard them, since they're already present
in the current branch.

# Wrapping it up

So here's the full workflow, ready for you to copy-paste:

```bash
git add -A
git stash
git difftool -y stash
git commit -a
git stash pop
```

# Bonus: Alias

As we all like our thing simple, here's a quick alias that will make your life
easier.

```bash
git config --global alias.pc '!git add -A; git stash; git difftool -y stash; git commit -a; git stash pop;'
```

Running this command will create a global alias of `git pc` that does the whole
workflow for you (pc as "Partial Commit").

Enjoy!

Commit message:

Add meta description to all pages

content/blog/workflow-for-partial-git-commits.md, after:

---
title: Workflow for partial Git commits
modified: 1449528542165
description: Learning git has a steep learning curve. This blog post introduces a workflow to git which helps you to split your commits with a nice, graphical interface. Also includes a nice alias to automate the workflow.
---

Here's the scenario: You've coded for a whole day and not done a single `git
commit` yet. How do you avoid 500+ line commits and break up your work to
logical commits?

# Copy your workflow from XCode

If you've ever done a commit with XCode, you know that one thing the Apple's
developers got right: The Version Editor.

<picture>
<source srcset="/images/xcode-version-editor-x2.png" media="(-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 2) and (min-width: 702px)">
<img alt="Xcode version editor" src="/images/xcode-version-editor.png">
</picture>

Version Editor lets you go through your changes you've done after your latest
commit. Before you write your commit message, you can briefly go through every
file and *choose* whether to include that specific change or not.

# How to apply Apple's workflow to command line?

Your regular "time to do a commit" workflow probably looks something like this:

```bash
git add .
git commit
```

The bad news is, that you automatically commit everything that you've touched
since the last commit. So how could we change this workflow to have the same
effect as with the XCode's version editor?

## Introducing stash diff

The good news is, that you can do a trick with the `git stash` that pretty much
mimics the workflow from XCode. This trick being, that you can do a `git diff`
also to the most recent `stash`:

```bash
git diff stash
```

Which shows the diff to the current stash. We can take it a step further and
launch the interactive `difftool` (I'm using OpenDiff) to go through the diffs,
adding the changes back to stage one by one.

# Taking it all together

So let's go through the whole workflow one by one.

## 1. Add everything to git

You should start up with your regular flow to make sure all changes are added to
your git.

```bash
git add -A
```

The `-A` flag adds every file to be committed, regardless of which directory
you're currently in.

## 2. Push the changes to stash

```bash
git stash
```

It doesn't matter if you already have something in your stash, since this
command always adds a new stash to the stack.

## 3. Pick which changes to commit

The following command opens up your difftool, which lets you pick the changes
you've made one by one back to stage:

```bash
git difftool -y stash
```

Note that you actually have to select all the changes you want to commit *back*
to your stage. If you're using OpenDiff, it means the arrow should point left to
add that change to your commit.

<picture>
<source srcset="/images/opendiff-x2.png" media="(-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 2) and (min-width: 702px)">
<img alt="OpenDiff arrow should point left to include it in the commit" src="/images/opendiff.png" width="645">
</picture>

When you're done with the file, hit `cmd` + `Q` to exit OpenDiff. When the
program prompts you whether to save the file, make sure to overwrite the current
file.


<img alt="Say yes to OpenDiff" src="/images/opendiff-confirm.png" width="451">

## 4. Perform the commit

Up next is your common routine: committing.

```bash
git commit -a
```

This creates a commit from the changes you just selected from the diff.

## 5. Pull back rest of the changes

Now we should head back to where we started. We can do this by popping the most
recently pushed stash:

```bash
git stash pop
```

Note that the stash we pop **does include the changes we already committed**,
but git just knows that it should discard them, since they're already present
in the current branch.

# Wrapping it up

So here's the full workflow, ready for you to copy-paste:

```bash
git add -A
git stash
git difftool -y stash
git commit -a
git stash pop
```

# Bonus: Alias

As we all like our thing simple, here's a quick alias that will make your life
easier.

```bash
git config --global alias.pc '!git add -A; git stash; git difftool -y stash; git commit -a; git stash pop;'
```

Running this command will create a global alias of `git pc` that does the whole
workflow for you (pc as "Partial Commit").

Enjoy!
