content/about.md, before:

---
title: About
showInMainMenu: true
menuOrder: 10
modified: 1449180000000
---

This website serves as the blog and somewhat portfolio of Jesse Luoto. The blog
posts will be about *current and past projects* of Jesse.

You can expect to find blog posts about **games**, **SaaS prototypes**,
**coding tools** and **websites**.

This website loads fast on any phone or computer and has an astonishing
[*Google Page Speed* score of **100/100**][100100].

Site is also open source and [available on GitHub][site-github] with MIT
license. Text content is licensed with Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 2.5 License.

# About the author <img src="/images/me.jpg" width="100" height="100" class="round">


Jesse Luoto is a senior developer at Reaktor. During his [10+ years of programming][LinkedIn]
he has worked with advertising agencies as with startups and consulting.

You can [follow Jesse on Twitter][Twitter] to discover great links to blog posts
about marketing and technology.



[100100]:/blog/howtoget.html
[site-github]:https://github.com/jehna/thejunkland.com
[LinkedIn]:https://fi.linkedin.com/in/jluoto
[Twitter]:https://twitter.com/luotojesse/
[Github]:https://github.com/jehna/

Commit message:

Add meta description to all pages

content/about.md, after:

---
title: About
showInMainMenu: true
menuOrder: 10
modified: 1449180000000
description: Jesse Luoto is a senior developer at Reaktor. During his 10+ years of programming he has worked with advertising agencies as with startups and consulting.
---

This website serves as the blog and somewhat portfolio of Jesse Luoto. The blog
posts will be about *current and past projects* of Jesse.

You can expect to find blog posts about **games**, **SaaS prototypes**,
**coding tools** and **websites**.

This website loads fast on any phone or computer and has an astonishing
[*Google Page Speed* score of **100/100**][100100].

Site is also open source and [available on GitHub][site-github] with MIT
license. Text content is licensed with Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 2.5 License.

# About the author <img src="/images/me.jpg" width="100" height="100" class="round">


Jesse Luoto is a senior developer at Reaktor. During his [10+ years of programming][LinkedIn]
he has worked with advertising agencies as with startups and consulting.

You can [follow Jesse on Twitter][Twitter] to discover great links to blog posts
about marketing and technology.



[100100]:/blog/howtoget.html
[site-github]:https://github.com/jehna/thejunkland.com
[LinkedIn]:https://fi.linkedin.com/in/jluoto
[Twitter]:https://twitter.com/luotojesse/
[Github]:https://github.com/jehna/
